playing musical chairs to the tune of one’s most beloved song. Music was on my
mind, for as I worked on the list in the nocturnal hours, I listened to American
Radio Service on a Sony in my room at the villa. The songs of the Temptations
and Janis Joplin and Marvin Gaye usually always made bad things bearable and
good things wonderful, but not in times like these. Every stroke of my pen
through a name felt like a death sentence. All of our names, from the lowest
officer to the General, had been found on a list being crammed into its owner’s
mouth as we broke down her door three years ago. The warning I had sent to
Man had not gotten to her in time. As the policemen wrestled her to the ground, I
had no choice but to reach into this communist agent’s mouth and pull from it
that saliva-soaked list. Its papier-mâché existence proved that members of the
Special Branch, accustomed to watching, were ourselves watched. Even had I a
moment alone with her, I could not have risked my cover by telling her that I
was on her side. I knew what fate awaited her. Everyone talked in the Special
Branch’s interrogation cells, and she would have told my secret despite herself.
She was younger than me, but she was wise enough to know what awaited her,
too. For just a moment I saw the truth in her eyes, and the truth was that she
hated me for what she thought I was, the agent of an oppressive regime. Then,
like me, she remembered the role she had to play. Please, sirs! she cried. I’m
innocent! I swear!
Three years later, this communist agent was still in a cell. I kept her folder on
my desk, a reminder of my failure to save her. It was my fault, too, Man had
said. When the day of liberation comes, I’ll be the one unlocking her cell. She
was twenty-two when arrested, and in the folder was a picture of her at her
capture, and another one of her from a few months ago, her eyes faded and her
hair thinning. Our prison cells were time machines, the inmates aging much
faster than they normally would. Looking at her faces, then and now, helped me
with the task of selecting a few men for salvation and condemning many more,
including some I liked. For several days I worked and reworked the list while the
defenders of Xuan Loc were annihilated and, across our border, Phnom Penh fell
to the Khmer Rouge. A few nights later, our ex-president secretly fled for
Taiwan. Claude, who drove him to the airport, noticed how the president’s
inordinately heavy suitcases clanked with something metallic, presumably a
hefty share of our nation’s gold. He told me this the next morning, when he
called to say that our plane was leaving in two days. I finished my list early that
evening, telling the General that I had decided to be democratic and
representative, choosing the highest-ranking officer, the officer everyone thought
the most honest, the one whose company I liked the most, and so on. He
accepted my reasoning and its inevitable consequence, that a good number of the
senior officers with the most knowledge and culpability in the work of the
Special Branch would be left behind. I wound up with a colonel, a major,
another captain, and two lieutenants. As for myself, I reserved one seat and three
more for Bon, his wife, and his child, my godson.
When the General visited me that night to commiserate, bearing the now half-
empty bottle of whiskey, I asked for the favor of taking Bon with us. Although
not my real brother, he was one of my two blood brothers since our school days.
Man was the other, the three of us having sworn undying loyalty to one another
by slicing our adolescent palms and mingling our blood in ritual handshakes. In
my wallet was a black-and-white photograph of Bon and his family. Bon had the
appearance of a good-looking man beaten to a pulp, except that was simply his
God-given face. Not even his paratrooper’s beret and crisply ironed tiger stripe
fatigues could distract from his parachute-like ears, his chin perpetually tucked
into the folds of his neck, and his flat nose bent hard right, the same as his
politics. As for his wife, Linh, a poet might compare her face to the harvest
moon, insinuating not only its fullness and roundness but also how it was
mottled and cratered, dappled with acne scars. How those two concocted a child
as cute as Duc was a mystery, or perhaps simply as logical as how two negatives
when multiplied together yield a positive. The General handed me the photo and
said, It’s the least I could do. He’s Airborne. If our army was just Airborne men,
we’d have won this war.
If . . . but there was no if, only the incontrovertible fact of the General sitting
on the edge of my chair while I stood by the window, sipping my whiskey. In the
courtyard, the General’s orderly fed fistfuls of secrets into a fire blazing in a
fifty-five-gallon drum, making the hot night hotter. The General got up and
paced my small chamber, glass in hand, clad only in his boxer shorts and a
sleeveless undershirt, a midnight shadow of stubble across his chin. Only his
housekeepers, his family, and myself ever saw him like this. At any hour of the
day when visitors came to the villa, he would pomade his hair and don his
starched khakis, the breast festooned with more ribbons than could be found in a
beauty queen’s hair. But this evening, with the villa’s hush punctuated only by
occasional shouts of gunfire, he allowed himself to be querulous about how the
Americans had promised us salvation from communism if we only did as we
were told. They started this war, and now that they’re tired of it, they’ve sold us
out, he said, pouring me another drink. But who is there to blame but ourselves?
We were foolish enough to think they would keep their word. Now there’s
nowhere to go but America. There are worse places, I said. Perhaps, he said. At
least we’ll live to fight again. But for now, we are well and truly fucked. What
kind of toast is right for that?
The words came to me after a moment.
Here’s blood in your eye, I said.
Damn right.
I forget from whom I learned this toast, or even what it meant, except that I
had acquired it sometime during my years in America. The General had been to
America, too, if only for a few months as a junior officer, training with a platoon
of his fellows at Fort Benning in ’58, where the Green Berets inoculated him
permanently against communism. In my case, the inoculation did not take. I was
already undercover, part scholarship student, part spy-in-training, the lone
representative of our people at a sylvan little college called Occidental, its motto
Occidens Proximus Orienti. There I passed six idyllic years in the dreamy, sun-
besotted world of Southern California during the sixties. Not for me the study of
highways, sewage systems, or other such useful enterprises. Instead, the mission
assigned to me by Man, my fellow conspirator, was to learn American ways of
thinking. My war was psychological. To that end, I read American history and
literature, perfected my grammar and absorbed the slang, smoked pot and lost
my virginity. In short, I earned not only my bachelor’s but my master’s degree,
becoming expert in all manner of American studies. Even now I can see quite
clearly where I first read the words of that greatest of American philosophers,
Emerson, on a lawn by an iridescent grove of jacaranda trees. My attention was
divided between the exotic, tawny co-eds in halter tops and shorts, sunning
themselves on beds of June grass, and the words so stark and black on a bare
white page—“consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.” Nothing Emerson
wrote was ever truer of America, but that was not the only reason I underlined
his words once, twice, thrice. What had smitten me then, and strikes me now,
was that the same thing could be said of our motherland, where we are nothing if
not inconsistent.
On our last morning, I drove the General to his office at the National Police
compound. My office was down the hallway from the General’s, and from there
I summoned the five chosen officers for a private meeting, one by one. We leave
tonight? asked the very nervous colonel, his eyes big and wet. Yes. My parents?
The parents of my wife? asked the major, a crapulent devotee of the Chinese
restaurants in Cholon. No. Brothers, sisters, nieces and nephews? No.
Housekeepers and nannies? No. Suitcases, wardrobes, collections of china? No.
The captain, who hobbled a bit because of venereal disease, threatened to
commit suicide unless I found more seats. I offered him my revolver and he
skulked off. In contrast, the young lieutenants were grateful. Having earned their
precious positions via parental connections, they bore themselves with the
herky-jerky nervousness of marionettes.
I closed the door on the last of them. When distant booms rattled the windows,
I saw fire and smoke boiling from the east. Enemy artillery had ignited the Long
Binh ammunition depot. Feeling a need both to mourn and to celebrate, I turned
to my drawer, where I kept a fifth of Jim Beam with several ounces remaining. If
my poor mother were alive, she would say, Don’t drink so much, son. It can’t be
good for you. But can’t it, Mama? When one finds oneself in as difficult a
situation as I did, a mole in the General’s staff, one looked for comfort wherever
one could find it. I finished the whiskey, then drove the General home through a
storm, the amniotic water bursting over the city a hint of the forthcoming season.
Some hoped the monsoon might slow down the advancing northern divisions,
but I thought that unlikely. I skipped dinner and packed my rucksack with my
toiletries, a pair of chinos and a madras shirt bought at a J. C. Penney in Los
Angeles, loafers, three changes of underwear, an electric toothbrush from the
thieves’ market, a framed photograph of my mother, envelopes of photographs
from here and America, my Kodak camera, and Asian Communism and the
Oriental Mode of Destruction.
The rucksack was a gift from Claude, given in honor of my college
graduation. It was the handsomest thing I owned, capable of being worn on my
back or, with a tuck of a strap here and there, converted to a hand-carried valise.
Fabricated of supple brown leather by an esteemed New England manufacturer,
the rucksack smelled richly, mysteriously of autumn leaves, grilled lobster, and
the sweat and sperm of boys’ boarding schools. A monogram of my initials was
branded on the side, but the most special feature was the false bottom. Every
man should have a false bottom in his luggage, Claude had said. You never
know when you’ll need it. Unbeknownst to him, I used it to hide my Minox
mini-camera. The cost of the Minox, a present from Man, was a few times my
annual salary. It was this I had used to photograph certain classified documents
to which I had access, and I thought perhaps it would be useful again. Lastly, I
sorted through the rest of my books and my records, most purchased in the
States and all bearing the fingerprints of memory. I had no room for Elvis or
Dylan, Faulkner or Twain, and while I could replace them, my spirit was still
heavy when I wrote Man’s name on the box of books and records. They were too
much to bear, as was my guitar, displaying its full, reproachful hips on my bed
as I left.
I finished packing and borrowed the Citroën to retrieve Bon. The military
police at the checkpoints waved me by when they saw the General’s stars on the
automobile. My destination was across the river, a wretched waterway lined with
the shanties of refugees from the countryside, their homes and farms obliterated
by pyromaniacal soldiers and clean-cut arsonists who had found their true
calling as bombardiers. Past this haphazard expanse of hovels, deep in District
Four, Bon and Man waited at a beer garden where the three of us had passed
more drunken hours than I could recall. Soldiers and marines crowded the tables,
rifles under their stools, hair cropped close by sadistic military barbers intent on
revealing the contours of their skulls for some nefarious phrenological purpose.
Bon poured me a glass of beer as soon as I sat down, but would not allow me to
drink until he offered a toast. Here’s to reunion, he said, lifting his own glass.
We’ll meet again in the Philippines! I said it was actually Guam, for the dictator
Marcos was fed up with refugees and no longer accepting any more. Groaning,
Bon rubbed his glass against his forehead. I didn’t think it could get any worse,
he said. But now we’ve got Filipinos looking down on us? Forget the
Philippines, Man said. Let’s drink to Guam instead. They say it’s where
America’s day begins. And our day ends, Bon muttered.
Unlike Man and I, Bon was a genuine patriot, a republican who had
volunteered to fight, having hated the communists ever since the local cadre
encouraged his father, the village chief, to kneel in the village square and make
his confession before forcefully inserting a bullet behind his ear. Left to his own
devices, Bon was sure to go Japanese and fight to the end or even put a gun to
his own head, so Man and I had persuaded him to think of his wife and child.
Leaving for America was not desertion, we claimed. This was strategic retreat.
We had told Bon that Man would also flee with his family tomorrow, whereas
the truth was that Man would stay to witness the liberation of the south by the
northern communists Bon so despised. Now Man squeezed him on the shoulder
with fingers long and delicate and said, We’re blood brothers, us three. We’ll be
blood brothers even if we lose this war, even if we lose our country. He looked
at me and his eyes were damp. For us there is no end.
You’re right, Bon said, shaking his head vigorously to disguise the tears in his
eyes. So enough sadness and gloom. Let’s drink to hope. We’ll return to take our
country back. Right? He, too, looked at me. I was not ashamed of the tears in my
own eyes. These men were better than any real brothers I could have had, for we
had chosen each other. I raised my beer glass. Here’s to coming back, I said.
And to a brotherhood that never ends. We drained our glasses, shouted for
another round, threw our arms around one another’s shoulders, and settled into
an hour of brotherly love and song, the music provided by a duo at the other end
of the garden. The guitarist was a long-haired draft dodger, sickly pale from
having lived for the last ten years in between the walls of the bar owner’s house
during the day, emerging only at night. His singing partner was an equally long-
haired woman of dulcet voice, her slim figure outlined by a silk ao dai the same
shade as a virgin’s blush. She was singing the lyrics of Trinh Cong Son, the folk
singer beloved even by the paratroopers. Tomorrow I’m going, dear . . . Her
voice rose above the chatter and rain. Remember to call me home . . . My heart
trembled. We were not a people who charged into war at the beck and call of
bugle or trumpet. No, we fought to the tunes of love songs, for we were the
Italians of Asia.
Tomorrow I’m going, dear. The city’s nights are no longer beautiful . . . If
Bon knew this was the last time he would see Man for years, perhaps ever, he
would never step on the airplane. Ever since our lycée days, we had fancied
ourselves the Three Musketeers, all for one and one for all. Man had introduced
us to Dumas: first, because he was a great novelist, and second, because he was a
quadroon. Hence he was a model for us, colonized by the same French who
despised him for his ancestry. An avid reader and storyteller, Man would have
likely become a teacher of literature at our lycée if we had lived in a time of
peace. Besides translating three of the Perry Mason mysteries of Erle Stanley
Gardner into our native tongue, he had also written a forgettable Zolaesque
novel under a pen name. He had studied America but never been there himself,
as was the case with Bon, who called for another round and asked if America
had beer gardens. They have bars and supermarkets where you can always get a
beer, I said. But are there beautiful women who sing songs like these? he asked.
I refilled his glass and said, They have beautiful women but they do not sing
songs like these.
Then the guitarist began strumming the chords of another song. They do sing
songs like this, Man said. It was Yesterday by the Beatles. As the three of us
joined in singing, my eyes grew moist. What was it like to live in a time when
one’s fate was not war, when one was not led by the craven and the corrupt,
when one’s country was not a basket case kept alive only through the
intravenous drip of American aid? I knew none of these young soldiers around
me except for my blood brothers and yet I confess that I felt for them all, lost in
their sense that within days they would be dead, or wounded, or imprisoned, or
humiliated, or abandoned, or forgotten. They were my enemies, and yet they
were also brothers-in-arms. Their beloved city was about to fall, but mine was
soon to be liberated. It was the end of their world, but only a shifting of worlds
for me. So it was that for two minutes we sang with all our hearts, feeling only
for the past and turning our gaze from the future, swimmers doing the backstroke
toward a waterfall.
The rain finally ceased by the time we left. We were smoking a final cigarette at
the mouth of the dank, dripping alley that was the beer garden’s exit when a trio
of hydrocephalic marines stumbled out of the vaginal darkness. Beautiful
Saigon! they sang. Oh, Saigon! Oh, Saigon! Although it was only six, they were
inebriated, fatigues stained with beer. Each had an M16 hanging from a shoulder
strap, and each showed off a spare pair of testicles. These, on closer inspection,
turned out to be two grenades clamped to either side of their belt buckles.
Although their uniforms, weapons, and helmets were all of American
manufacture, as were ours, it was impossible to mistake them for Americans, the
dented helmets being the giveaway, steel pots sized for American heads that
were too big for any of us. The first marine’s head swung this way and that
before he bumped into me and cursed, the brim of his helmet falling all the way
to his nose. When he pushed up the brim, I saw bleary eyes trying to focus.
Hello! he said, breath reeking, his southern accent so thick I had some trouble
understanding him. What’s this? A policeman? What’re you doing with the real
soldiers?
Man flicked ashes at him. This policeman’s a captain. Salute your superior,
Lieutenant.
The second marine, also a lieutenant, said, If you say so, Major, to which the
third marine, a lieutenant as well, said, The hell with majors and colonels and
generals. The president’s run off. The generals—poof! Like smoke. Gone.
Saving their own asses like they always do. Guess what? That leaves us to cover
the retreat. Like we always do. What retreat? the second marine said. There’s
nowhere to go. The third agreed: We’re dead. As good as dead, the first said.
Our job is to be dead.
I tossed away my cigarette. You’re not dead yet. You should get back to your
posts.
The first marine focused once more on my face, taking a step closer until his
nose nearly touched mine. What are you?
You are out of line, Lieutenant! Bon shouted.
I’ll tell you what you are. The marine poked his finger in my chest.
Don’t say it, I said.
A bastard! he cried. The two other marines laughed and chimed in. A bastard!
I drew my revolver and placed the muzzle between the marine’s eyes. Behind
him, his friends fingered their rifles nervously but did no more. They were
impaired, but not enough to think they could be faster on the draw than my more
sober friends.
You’re drunk, aren’t you, Lieutenant? Despite myself, my voice trembled.
Yes, the marine said. Sir.
Then I won’t shoot you.
It was then, to my great relief, that we heard the first of the bombs.
Everybody’s head swiveled in the direction of the explosion, which was
followed by another and another, to the northwest. It’s the airport, Bon said.
Five-hundred-pound bombs. He would turn out to be correct in both cases. From
our vantage point, we could see nothing except, after a few moments, billowing
plumes of black smoke. Then it seemed as if every gun in the city went off from
downtown to the airport, light weaponry going clack-clack-clack and heavy
weaponry going chug-chug-chug, flurries of orange tracers swirling into the sky.
The racket drew all the residents of the pitiful street to their windows and into
the doorways, and I holstered my revolver. Likewise sobered by the presence of
witnesses, the marine lieutenants clambered into their jeep without another word
and drove off, weaving through the handful of motorbikes on the street until they
reached the intersection. Then the jeep braked to a halt and the marines stumbled
out with M16s in hand, even as the explosions continued and civilians thronged
the sidewalks. My pulse quickened when the marines glared at us from under the
jaundiced light of a streetlamp, but all they did was aim skyward, howling and
screaming as they fired their weapons until the magazines were empty. My heart
was beating fast and the sweat was trickling down my back, but I smiled for the
sake of my friends and lit another cigarette.
Idiots! Bon shouted as the civilians crouched in doorways. The marines called
us a few choice names before they got back into the jeep, turned the corner, and
vanished. Bon and I said good-bye to Man, and after he left in his own jeep I
tossed Bon the keys. The bombing and the gunfire had ceased, and as he drove
the Citroën to his apartment he swore bloody murder at the Marine Corps the
entire way. I kept my silence. One did not depend on marines for good table
manners. One depended on them to have the right instincts when it came to
matters of life and death. As for the name they had called me, it upset me less
than my reaction to it. I should have been used to that misbegotten name by now,
but somehow I was not. My mother was native, my father was foreign, and
strangers and acquaintances had enjoyed reminding me of this ever since my
childhood, spitting on me and calling me bastard, although sometimes, for
variety, they called me bastard before they spit on me.
